Updated the terrain surface materials list and terrain world debugger documentation (#2066)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/surface-material-list.md

weight: 100
---

The **Terrain Surface Materials List** component defines mappings between surface types and render materials. You can use this to change the appearance of a surface type within different areas of your game. When you assign a material to a surface type, all the visible surfaces of that type, within the bounds of the required [Axis Aligned Box Shape](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/shape/axis-aligned-box-shape/) component, will adopt that material.

This component makes use of [macro materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-macro-material) and [detail materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-detail-material/) across a large terrain surface and blends between them. This blending of detail materials with the macro material enables you to use small, high fidelity, tiled detail materials by creating variations in color and lighting across the terrain.

> For an example of how to use the detail materials with a surface materials list, please follow the [apply detail materials](/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/create-terrain-from-images/#apply-detail-materials) section of the **Create Terrain from Images** tutorial.

Reviewer: We should also explain in this section a bit more about how blending works. @invertednormal can correct me here, but I believe the three surface materials with the highest weight values at every point will be blended together with relative weighting to add up to 100%. So for example, if grass has 0.25, dirt has 0.125, sand has 0.125, and rock has 0.05, then the blend will ignore rock, and the result will be 50% grass, 25% dirt, and 25% sand.

Author: Sure thing I can extend the description to include this example!

weight: 100
---

The **Terrain Surface Materials List** component defines mappings between surface types and render materials. You can use this to change the appearance of a surface type within different areas of your game. When you assign a material to a surface type, all the visible surfaces of that type, within the bounds of the required [Axis Aligned Box Shape](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/shape/axis-aligned-box-shape/) component, will adopt that material.

> This component makes use of [macro materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-macro-material) and [detail materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-detail-material/) across a large terrain surface and blends between them. This blending of detail materials with the macro material enables you to use small, high fidelity, tiled detail materials that have variations in color and lighting across the terrain.

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestions to condense the wording.

Whether to use commas after multiple adjectives or not depends on what the adjectives apply to. If they all apply to the noun, then add the commas. (To determine this, you should be able to swap the adjectives around without changing the meaning, for example "tiled, high-fidelity, small detail materials".)
Otherwise, as per mbalfour-amzn's suggestion, each adjective describes the following adj+noun unit, so order matters, and you can remove the commas. 
https://style.mla.org/coordinate-adjectives-commas/

```suggestion
This component uses [macro materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-macro-material) and [detail materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-detail-material/) across a large terrain surface and blends between them. This blending of detail materials with the macro material enables you to use small high-fidelity tiled detail materials that have variations in color and lighting across the terrain.
```

Author: Sounds good! Have incorporated the "makes use of" -> "uses" change and took Mike's suggested change for the other part.

Reviewer: Ooh, thanks for giving me the formal terminology to describe this! It's on the edge, but I _think_ "small" is a coordinate adjective in this case, so I think it reads better without the commas. That said, the entire sentence is awkward and I don't think we're conveying the idea quite right yet.

Maybe:
"By using macro materials for the large-scale low-fidelity color variations and tiling detail materials for the small-scale high-fidelity details, the resulting terrain has a much broader variety of color and texture than what can be achieved with just the detail materials by themselves."

> The blending is based on the surface weights of the materials. The three surface materials with the highest weight values at every point will be blended together with relative weighting to add up to 100%. For example, say you had the following surface materials/weights:

Reviewer 2: - Nit: Clarified "the blending" to "macro and detail material blending" since it's a new paragraph. 
- Nit: Clarified that 100% also equates to 1.0. Although this may be intuitive, I figured it's minimal effort to clarify that and because your example uses decimals. 
- Other minor wording suggestions

```suggestion
Macro and detail material blending is based on the surface weights of the materials. The three surface materials with the highest weight values at every point blend together with relative weighting to add up to 100%, or 1.0. For example, suppose you have the following surface materials and weights:
```

Author: These all sound good, will replace!

* Grass = 0.25
* Dirt = 0.125
* Sand = 0.125
* Rock = 0.05

> In this scenario, the blend will ignore rock, and the result will be 50% grass, 25% dirt, and 25% sand.

Reviewer 2: Nit: Preference to speak in present-tense as long as its appropriate. 
```suggestion
In this scenario, the blend ignores rock, and the result is 50% grass, 25% dirt, and 25% sand.
```

Author: Good call out thank you

> For an example of how to use the detail materials with a surface materials list, please follow the [apply detail materials](/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/create-terrain-from-images/#apply-detail-materials) section of the **Create Terrain from Images** tutorial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For an example of how to use the detail materials with a surface materials list, follow the [Apply detail materials](/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/environments/create-terrain-from-images/#apply-detail-materials) section of the **Create Terrain from Images** tutorial.
```

Author: Thanks!

The **Terrain Surface Materials List** component defines mappings between surface types and render materials. You can use this to change the appearance of a surface type within different areas of your game. When you assign a material to a surface type, all the visible surfaces of that type, within the bounds of the required [Axis Aligned Box Shape](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/shape/axis-aligned-box-shape/) component, will adopt that material.

> This component makes use of [macro materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-macro-material) and [detail materials](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-detail-material/) across a large terrain surface and blends between them. This blending of detail materials with the macro material enables you to use small, high fidelity, tiled detail materials that have variations in color and lighting across the terrain.

Reviewer: "small, high fidelity, tiled detail materials" -> "small high-fidelity tiled detail materials"

Author: Done!

[Terrain Gem](/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/environment/terrain)

## Dependencies

[Axis-Aligned Box Shape](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/shape/axis-aligned-box-shape)

## Properties

![Terrain Surface Materials List component properties](/images/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-surface-materials-list-component.png)

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|

> | **Default Material** | The default material to fall back to where no other material surface mappings exist. | Material Asset | None |

Reviewer: Either here or above we should mention that the default material doesn't blend with other materials, because it doesn't have a surface weight. So for example, if you have a default material of grass, and a material mapping with dirt, even if the dirt has a weight of 0.01, you will see 100% dirt and no grass.

The primary intended uses of the default material are either to use an "error" material to see every place that a detail material hasn't been mapped, or to just quickly cover an entire terrain surface with a single material without setting up more complicated mappings.

Reviewer 3: We may be able to make the detail material more useful in the future, but as @mbalfour-amzn said, it's mostly a placeholder for now.

Author: Good call!

[Terrain Gem](/docs/user-guide/gems/reference/environment/terrain)

## Dependencies

[Axis-Aligned Box Shape](/docs/user-guide/components/reference/shape/axis-aligned-box-shape)

## Properties

![Terrain Surface Materials List component properties](/images/user-guide/components/reference/terrain/terrain-surface-materials-list-component.png)

| Property | Description | Values | Default |
|-|-|-|-|

> | **Default Material** | The default material to fall back to where no other material surface mappings exist.<br><br>**NOTE:** The default material doesn't blend with other materials because it has no surface weight. The primary intended uses of the default material are either as an error material to see every place that a detail material hasn't been mapped, or to quickly cover an entire terrain surface with a single material without setting up more complicated mappings. | Material Asset | None |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Default Material** | The default material to fall back to when no other material surface mappings exist.<br><br>**NOTE:** The default material doesn't blend with other materials because it has no surface weight. The primary intended uses of the default material are either as an error material to see every place that a detail material hasn't been mapped, or to quickly cover an entire terrain surface with a single material without setting up more complicated mappings. | Material Asset | None |
```

Author: Done

| Request Name | Description | Parameter | Return | Scriptable |
|-|-|-|-|-|

> | `GetTerrainSurfaceMaterialRegion` | Retrieves the Aabb for the region where a `TerrainSurfaceMaterialMapping` exists.  | None | Aabb | No. |
> | `GetSurfaceMaterialMappings` | Retrieves all the assigned surface types, the materials that you have assigned to them, and the bounds that are set for this entity.  | None | Terrain Surface Material Mapping: Vector | No. |

Reviewer 2: Very nit - It would be better if you can remove the periods here and the next comment
```suggestion
| `GetTerrainSurfaceMaterialRegion` | Retrieves the Aabb for the region where a `TerrainSurfaceMaterialMapping` exists.  | None | Aabb | No |
| `GetSurfaceMaterialMappings` | Retrieves all the assigned surface types, the materials that you have assigned to them, and the bounds that are set for this entity.  | None | Terrain Surface Material Mapping: Vector | No |
```

Author: Will do

> | `GetDefaultMaterial` | Retrieves the default material for this surface material.  | None | Terrain Surface Material Mapping | No. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `GetDefaultMaterial` | Retrieves the default material for this surface material.  | None | Terrain Surface Material Mapping | No |
```

Author: Done!
